Feature/asyncio instrumentation (#1943)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib: instrumentation/opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio/README.rst

OpenTelemetry asyncio Instrumentation
======================================

|pypi|

.. |pypi| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio.svg
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio/

AsyncioInstrumentor: Tracing Requests Made by the Asyncio Library

> The opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio package allows tracing asyncio applications.
> The metric for coroutine, future, is generated even if there is no setting to generate a span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio package allows tracing asyncio applications.
It also includes metrics for duration and counts of coroutines and futures. Metrics are generated even if coroutines are not traced.
```

Set the name of the coroutine you want to trace.
-------------------------------------------------
.. code:: bash

    export OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_COROUTINE_NAMES_TO_TRACE=coro_name,coro_name2,coro_name3

> If you want to keep track of which function to use in the to_thread function of asyncio, set the name of the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to trace specific blocking functions executed with the ``to_thread`` function of asyncio, set the name of the functions in ``OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_TO_THREAD_FUNCTION_NAMES_TO_TRACE``.
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. code:: bash

    export OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_TO_THREAD_FUNCTION_NAMES_TO_TRACE=func_name,func_name2,func_name3

> For future, set it up like this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable tracing futures with ``OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_FUTURE_TRACE_ENABLED``
```

OpenTelemetry asyncio Instrumentation
======================================

|pypi|

.. |pypi| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio.svg
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio/

AsyncioInstrumentor: Tracing Requests Made by the Asyncio Library

> The opentelemetry-instrumentation-asycnio package allows tracing asyncio applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The opentelemetry-instrumentation-asyncio package allows tracing asyncio applications.
```

.. code:: bash

    export OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_FUTURE_TRACE_ENABLED=true

Run instrumented application
-----------------------------
1. coroutine
--------------------
.. code:: python

    # export OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_COROUTINE_NAMES_TO_TRACE=sleep

    import asyncio
    from opentelemetry.instrumentation.asyncio import AsyncioInstrumentor

    AsyncioInstrumentor().instrument()

    async def main():
        await asyncio.create_task(asyncio.sleep(0.1))

    asyncio.run(main())

2. future
--------------------
.. code:: python

    # export OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_FUTURE_TRACE_ENABLED=true

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

    future = asyncio.Future()
    future.set_result(1)
    task = asyncio.ensure_future(future)
    loop.run_until_complete(task)

3. to_thread
--------------------
.. code:: python

    # export OTEL_PYTHON_ASYNCIO_TO_THREAD_FUNCTION_NAMES_TO_TRACE=func

    import asyncio
    from opentelemetry.instrumentation.asyncio import AsyncioInstrumentor

    AsyncioInstrumentor().instrument()

    async def main():
        await asyncio.to_thread(func)

    def func():
        pass

    asyncio.run(main())

asyncio metric types
----------------------

> * `asyncio.futures.duration` (ms) - Duration of the future

Author: Thanks for the feedback. 
i've fixed that part to seconds.

* `asyncio.futures.exceptions` (count) - Number of exceptions raised by the future
* `asyncio.futures.cancelled` (count) - Number of futures cancelled
* `asyncio.futures.created` (count) - Number of futures created
* `asyncio.futures.active` (count) - Number of futures active
* `asyncio.futures.finished` (count) - Number of futures finished

> * `asyncio.futures.timeouts` (count) - Number of futures timed out

Reviewer: Can at least some of these metrics be collapsed into a single metric with an attribute indicating the "state"? As an example see `system.cpu.time` metric which has a `system.cpu.state` attribute https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/system/system-metrics/#metric-systemcputime

Keep in mind that the sum across dimensions should be meaningful which I'm not sure is the case here. Something like this:

- `asyncio.futures.count` of type Counter
  - `state`: `cancelled | finished | timed_out | exception`
  - note that sum across all of these is total number created/finished so you don't need that metric
- `asyncio.futures.active` of type UpDownCounter

The same comment applies to the below metrics

Author: I've made the changes you suggested.
I've learned a lot from you today, thanks for the feedback.

> * `asyncio.coroutine.duration` (ms) - Duration of the coroutine

Reviewer: What's the reason to treat coroutines and futures separately? It's not super clear to me why you would want to observe them as different things.

If it's important, would it be possible to instead use an attribute to indicate the type of awaitable?

Author: Thanks for the feedback. 
Upon further reflection, I was able to make it a single metric as you suggest.
`asyncio.process.duration`
`asyncio.process.count`
I modified it to two metrics and added `type` and `state`.

Reviewer: Nice looks good!
